You're gonna find that procedures and
functions are very similar.
But a procedure is a bit more
limited in what can accomplish.
I think procedures came first and
then they made functions later that feels
right for
me to say I have no data on that.
So Someone's probably gonna correct me but
there are some.
There's a lot of similarities.
Functions can definitely do more,
almost everything that a procedure can
do a function can do whereas
the other way around is not true.
So, a procedure is designed to do
some sort of action, a function,
its general purpose.
It can do an action, it can just
do some sort of like selecting,
it can do basically anything that you
can think of in code that you would run
inside of a database.
That's what a function can do a procedure
is much more scoped down to doing some
individual action, let's just
think about our recipes database.
Let's say we have a lot of
churn on ingredients for
images can get created and deleted and
sometimes images are set to null, right?
Let's say we wanted to tolerate that,
that sometimes ingredients could be null.
So we don't want to set, like the not
null constraint on the database.
But let's say that we don't want
to keep that for very long.
What we could do is we could have some
sort of job right that would run in
the background that would just go and
find all of the images that had null set
on them and then it would set
it to some default image.
Right does that makes sense?
So you have an ingredient it has an image,
for some reason the image gets deleted,
maybe it gets dropped out of our cache or
something like that.
So that at that point for a brief moment
of time, whether that's, minutes, hours,
days, something like that.
It'll have an ingredient that will have
a null image and then at some point we can
run a procedure that goes and
sets all of those to be default .jpg.
That's what a procedure would be fit for.
That is what that's like the call sign for
when a procedure could be useful.
So let's run this query right now,
SELECT* WHERE image IS NULL.
Right now we don't have any.
But let's just go insert
something into our database.
So we're going to put venison in there.
And now if we run that again, we now have
venison that does not have an image.
All right so this is what I'm talking
about maybe, maybe this would be another
case where we'd want to allow people to
insert things and we don't want to like
burden the process too much with
all this like setting things.
I don't know I'm contriving
a very contrived example here.
You were just in your code,
say call this default .jpg and
call it good and
then make image not nullable.
Bear with me for a moment, please.
Now we're going to create a procedure.
And it's going to be called set
null ingredients to default.
This is not going to be
the programming language,
this is actually going
to be directly a query.
So we can say the language is SQL,
it's not the PL/pgSQL.
So all it's going to do is
upgrade ingredients set image to
default where image is null, right?
It's really just running a quick query.
You can use PL/pgSQL here,
by the way, we just didn't need to.
So now I have a procedure here
that I can call at any interval.
We created our procedure here.
We haven't called it yet we haven't done
anything if we call that query again.
Venison's still there and has no image.
So again we could use PL/pgSQL here but
we don't need to this is a simple query
if you needed to do some sort of for
loop or something like that you could you,
you would need to use PL/pgSQL.
Now, we could have some sort of
background job, we can have something in
our database, or not our database that
are like app that would reach out,
there's a crom that we could
have like a AWS lambda,
that lambda is some sort of
timer that would call this.
But anyway, something needs to
call this function right here.
Which is CALL,
what did I call it, set null ingredients,
null ingredient images to default.
I'm just gonna copy that because
I don't want to write it again.
Call that it has no parameters.
It could have had parameters.
We just didn't give it any right.
We could have made it like,
some sort of like,
parameter to like what image
that we're gonna set it to but
we didn't, that's fine.
We're just going to call that so
I called the procedure.
Now if I come back here and
say this again it is not null and
if I say select star from ingredients.
WHERE id equals 127,
which is what we saw right there.
You'll see now that it has a default jpg.
So we call we use CALL
instead of SELECT here,
that's what procedures you CALL them,
whereas with functions you SELECT them.
So we can invoke this
procedure whenever we want to.
And that is that's it.
Now you might ask me when would you ever
use a procedure instead of a function
because everything I just showed you
you could obviously do with a function.
I don't know there's not really
a good reason procedures
have just been around for a long time so
people expect them to be there.
There's a bunch of stuff
that's built on procedures.
They are more limited so if you believe
in like the principle of least power
right we try to use the least powerful
thing that it can accomplish what you're
trying to do procedure would be that.
Frankly if it was me I probably
wouldn't put any of this in my.
If I wouldn't make a procedure,
I wouldn't make a function I
would just have my code do it.
I'd write some sort of lambda that
would just query the database and
then update all those things
because again if this lives
in your database it's not
in your source control it's
really hard to track that business
logic outside of your application.
So I don't really suggest it,
but I wanted to know it's there.
It is kind of fun.
And when I'm doing stupid projects for
myself,
I really like to write
stupid things like this.
>> Can you call functions and
starred procedures from other
functions and starred procedures?
>> Yes you you can call you can do both.
I don't know, I assume you can
call a function from a procedure.
You can definitely call
a procedure from a function.
Vice versa I'm less sure.
That seems like a cascading
effect of terror.
>> Yeah.
>> But it's it sounds plausible.
Yeah, question Dustin.
>> If a procedure or
function has to update millions of rows,
will it be a blocking operation?
>> It's let me answer that
with a hand wavy response,
which is it's not any different than
just calling a function, right?
So if you have some sort of function
that's going to tie up your database
doing it through a procedure a function
is also going to tie up your database.
So the call the way it's called isn't
going to make a difference in that
particular case.
The performance profile does not change
coming from a procedure function or
just a normal query.
If you're in those kind of cases where
you are like updating a lot of things and
alter tables, and things like that.
You need to be more thoughtful
than just writing a big query.
You kind of have to do that
piecemeal through code.